Sauron sends a great army against Gondor.
Gandalf arrives at Minas Tirith to warn Denethor of the attack, while Théoden musters the Riders of Rohan to go to Gondor's aid.
Minas Tirith is besieged; the Lord of the Nazgûl uses a spell-wound battering ram to destroy the city's gates.
Denethor, deceived by Sauron, falls into despair.
He burns himself alive on a pyre; Pippin and Gandalf rescue his son Faramir from the same fate.
Aragorn, accompanied by Legolas, Gimli, and the Rangers of the North, takes the Paths of the Dead to recruit the Dead Men of Dunharrow, oathbreakers who will have no rest until they fight for the King of Gondor.
Aragorn unleashes the Army of the Dead on the Corsairs of Umbar invading southern Gondor.
He and men of southern Gondor sail in the Corsairs' ships up the Anduin, reaching Minas Tirith just in time to turn the tide of battle.
Théoden's niece Éowyn, who joined the army in disguise, kills the Lord of the Nazgûl with help from Merry; both are wounded.
Gondor and Rohan defeat Sauron's army in the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, but Théoden is killed.
Aragorn enters Minas Tirith and heals the sick.
He leads an army through Ithilien to the Black Gate to distract Sauron from his true danger.
At the Battle of the Morannon, his army is vastly outnumbered.

Sam rescues Frodo from the tower of Cirith Ungol.
They set out across Mordor.
When they reach the edge of the Cracks of Doom, Frodo cannot resist the Ring any longer: he claims it for himself and puts it on.
Gollum reappears.
He bites off Frodo's Ring finger.
Celebrating wildly, Gollum loses his footing and falls into the Fire, taking the Ring with him.
When the Ring is destroyed, Sauron loses his power.
All he created collapses, the Nazgûl perish, Aragorn wins the battle of the Morannon, and the Eagles rescue Frodo and Sam from the ruin of Mount Doom.
Aragorn is crowned King, and weds Arwen, Elrond's daughter.
Théoden is buried; Éomer is crowned King of Rohan.
His sister Éowyn is engaged to Faramir, now Steward of Gondor and Prince of Ithilien.
Galadriel, Celeborn, and Gandalf say farewell to Treebeard, and to Aragorn.
The four hobbits travel home, only to find it has been taken over by Saruman's men.
Merry raises a rebellion and scours the Shire.
Saruman reveals crimes that Wormtongue has done, causing Wormtongue to turn on Saruman and kill him in front of Bag End, Frodo's home.
Wormtongue then is killed by hobbit archers.
Merry and Pippin are celebrated as heroes.
Sam marries Rosie Cotton and uses his gifts to heal the Shire.
Frodo, broken by the quest, leaves a few years later, sailing from the Grey Havens over the Sea to find peace.

Extensive appendices outline more details of the history, cultures, genealogies, and languages that Tolkien imagined for the peoples of Middle-earth.
In antiquarian style, they provide background details for the narrative, with much detail for Tolkien fans who want to know more about the stories.
