A party of Orcs sent by Saruman and Sauron attack the Fellowship.
Boromir tries to protect Merry and Pippin from the Orcs, but they kill him and capture the two Hobbits.
Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas decide to pursue the Orcs.
The Orcs are killed by Riders of Rohan, led by Éomer.
The Hobbits escape into Fangorn Forest, where they are befriended by the Ent Treebeard.
Aragorn, Gimli and Legolas track the hobbits to Fangorn, where they meet Gandalf: he explains that he killed the Balrog; he too was killed in the fight, but was sent back to Middle-earth.
He is now Gandalf the White, replacing Saruman as chief of the wizards.
They ride to Edoras, capital of Rohan.
Gandalf frees King Théoden from the influence of Saruman's spy Gríma Wormtongue.
Théoden musters his army and rides to the fortress of Helm's Deep; Gandalf departs to seek help from Treebeard.
The Ents destroy Isengard, Saruman's stronghold, and flood it, trapping the wizard in the tower of Orthanc.
Gandalf convinces Treebeard to send an army of Huorns to Théoden's aid.
He brings an army of Riders of Rohan to Helm's Deep.
They defeat the Orcs, who flee into the forest of Huorns and are destroyed.
Gandalf, Théoden, Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli ride to Isengard, where they find Merry and Pippin relaxing amidst the ruins.
Gandalf offers Saruman a chance to turn away from evil.
When Saruman refuses, Gandalf strips him of his rank and most of his powers.
Wormtongue throws down a hard round object to try to kill Gandalf.
Pippin picks it up; Gandalf swiftly takes it, but Pippin steals it in the night.
It is a palantír, a seeing-stone that Saruman used to speak with Sauron, becoming ensnared.
Sauron sees Pippin, but misunderstands the circumstances.
Gandalf rides for Minas Tirith, chief city of Gondor, taking Pippin with him.

Frodo and Sam struggle through the barren hills of the Emyn Muil.
They realize they are being tracked; on a moonlit night they capture Gollum, who has followed them from Moria.
Frodo makes Gollum swear to serve him, as Ringbearer, and asks him to guide them to Mordor.
Gollum leads them across the Dead Marshes.
Sam overhears Gollum debating with his alter ego, Sméagol, whether to steal the Ring.
The Black Gate of Mordor is too well guarded, so they travel south through Ithilien to a secret pass that Gollum knows.
They are captured by rangers led by Faramir, Boromir's brother, and brought to the secret fastness of Henneth Annûn.
Faramir resists the temptation to seize the Ring and, disobeying orders to arrest strangers, releases them.
Gollum guides the hobbits to the pass, but leads them into the lair of the great spider Shelob in the tunnels of Cirith Ungol.
Frodo holds up his gift, the Phial of Galadriel, which holds the light of Eärendil's star: it drives Shelob back.
Frodo cuts through a giant web using his sword Sting.
Shelob attacks again, and Frodo falls to her venom.
Sam picks up Sting and the Phial.
He wounds the monster.
Believing Frodo to be dead, a devestated Sam takes the Ring to continue the quest alone.
Orcs take Frodo; Sam overhears them saying that Frodo is still alive, and sets out to rescue him.
